Alongside responsive design colors
are probably the most popular use
of custom properties.
Let's look at an example here.
So we have two accent colors.
One of them is this blue accent color and
one of them is red, but
it just happens to be red,
it could be anything else.
And we've used them here both for
the heading colors and
also for these buttons.
And we've used them in
a variety of places.
However, there is a problem
with using colors that way.
And this problem becomes apparent
as designs evolve over time and
CSS code changes by
multiple developers often.
So let's say we've designed this,
the website that
uses the these things and
later on we want to redesign and
lovely custom properties
make it easy to do that.
We can just go here and change our second
accent color to use this kind of green.
Let's make it a little bit less saturated.
Okay, and we quickly look at things and
we're like, this looks fine.
However, the problem is that
we have used the second
accent color variable as
just accent color two,
when we actually wanted
to ascribe meaning to it.
We had these cancel buttons and
these delete button that didn't
just need the second accent color.
They actually needed red.
And we had taken advantage of the fact
that our second accent color just happened
to be red, and we just said,
okay, we have this variable,
we're just gonna use this variable.
It looks fine, it's red.
It conveys what we want to convey.
But the intent that we specified in
our code was not our actual intent.
Our actual intent was to convey
that this action is dangerous.
This button will cancel what you're doing,
will delete what you're doing.
Colors have meanings,
they're not just decoration.
So then when we change the second accent
color, this violated our intent and now it
actually looks like you should be pressing
the cancel button because it's green.
So what can we do?
There are many schools of thought here.
Some people name their colors after
after the main hue they say color red,
color green, color blue,
that would prevent this.
But also in other cases we do just want
whatever the first accent color is.
So what do we do then?.
We don't actually have to choose.
We can just alias colors
to whatever we want.
When we had red here, we could have also
said color red, var accent color two.
And then when the redesign came along and
we wanted to change this to be green,
whoever did the redesign
would look at this and
say wait a second this
is not true anymore.
I need to specify a separate red for
whatever actually needs red.
And then we would have
still had a red there.
And obviously we would need
to actually use that here.
But we wouldn't be using
it in the heading.
Because the heading actually needs the
second accent color, we actually wanted to
just use the second accent color,
whatever that was in the heading.
So one thing is that I think it
makes a lot of sense to use hue
based aliases of accent
colors to make content clear.
You don't need to decide whether
you're gonna use like primary and
secondary and color one and color red,
you can just use all of them.
Now the main thing that most
people want from colors is
creating variations of them.
Right now we can use custom
properties to specify entire colors,
like primary color,
secondary color, and so on.
But, what happens when we
want a darker primary color?
I mean,
surely we could do something like this and
people do often specify these,
like primary color darker, whatever.
But then we need to change.
We need to change these
colors in multiple places.
Here we've applied a variety of
hacks that people often do to create
variations of existing colors.
We have a semi transparent white to
create a lighter primary color, and
we've applied the brightness filter
to make a darker secondary color.
How can we use custom properties to
actually create these variations without
these hacks?
So we're first going to
see Tte most verbose but
flexible way, so what we could do is,
we could create variables for
each individual component.
It's very, very verbose.
But it works.
And then here, we just use them.
And we don't need fullbacks here because
they're all defined in the same rule.
So we know they have a value.
There it is.
And we could do the same thing
with the secondary color.
I know it's very tedious.
40% here, and
another 40% and
then I'm just gonna copy this.
And now we have all we know that we
actually need to create variations.
It's not gonna look pretty, but
it's it does make it possible.
So here for
example in this link, instead of
using this brightness hack,
we can go here and
instead of specifying
the secondary color directly,
we can specify a variation of
it with a smaller lightness,
something like this or
even something relative.
Like we could multiply
the lightness by 0.6,
which is closer to what we
were doing with the filter.
And now let's go here.
We are specifying the semi
transparent white background.
What we actually want is
a lighter primary color.
This is primarily a proof of concept
because in this case I actually
think the semi transparent white is
fine but let's do it a variation.
And we could either multiply it by
a factor or we could add 50% for
example, it depends on what kind
of variation you actually want.
Some variations make more sense as
additions others as multiplications.
You could even use clump to make sure
that the result is always readable.
Like let's say you want the resulting
brightness to be between 80% and 95%.
Whoops, this should be inside the clump.
And now,
no matter what we do in the math here,
we cannot actually go above 95% and
we cannot actually go below 80%.
So we can not screw up the accessibility
of our website by doing incorrect
math here or by having colors outside
the range of colors we expected.
So, the first way we've seen to
do color variations is to specify
each color component via separate
variables and just do math with it.
And that works.
It's very, very verbose.
It's painful to look at, but it works and
this is what a lot of code does today,
and then as an aside we can use
clamp to to ensure readability.
There is a second, there is a slight
improvement that we could make over this.
So usually when we want to
create these variations,
we just want to change the lightness and
sometimes the alpha but
we don't usually want to change the hue
and the saturation because the hue and
the saturation is what basically
makes our color what it is.
It's the essence of our color.
So what we can do is we can store
these in the same variable.
We can have HHS instead of H and S.
And then at least that reduces the number
of variables we need to use for
each color by a third, which is something.
Let's see and I need to change
them here as well and here too.
Yes and that works fine.
So the second takeaway around colors
is that we can store multiple
color components in the same variable.
Now what happens if we want to create
further variations within the same
component?
Let's say we want to make the links.
The links later on hover.
Let's try to do that.
So if we add a hover rule here and
we want to apply a different lightness,
we would have actually need to copy
this entire unwieldy thing and.
Change the lightness.
It works but it's not great.
So what can we do?
We can use a variation of this
technique within this CSS rule.
So you know how we have separate
likenesses and hues and
saturations in the main rule.
We can do text color L and
you can also do hue and
saturation if you need it but here we
just knew we just need L and use that.
And that also makes our code
slightly easier to read I find.
So all right we need we calc as well,
okay?
And- There we are.
And then here, instead of having
to repeat the entire color,
all we need to do is
override just the lightness.
And it works.
So another strategy is using
background color star, text color star.
It could be even like box shadow,
whatever lightness, whatever you need for
independent tweaking of color
components for specific elements.